## Introduction

Since Margaret Dayhoff pioneered the field of bioinformatics back in the sixties, the application of computational tools to the field of biology has vastly grown in scope and impact. Nowadays, biotechnological and biomedical research are routinely fed by the insights arising from novel computational approaches, machine learning algorithms and mathematical models. The ever increasing amount of biological data and the exponential growth in computing power will amplify this trend in the years to come.

The use of computers to address biological matters encompasses a wide array of applications usually grouped under the terms of computational biology and bioinformatics. Although distinct definitions have been delineated for each one, here we will consider “computational biology” as the umbrella term for any application that involves the intersection of computing and modern biological data. As such, a computational biologist can be a bioinformatician, a statistician, a mathematical modeler, a data analyst, a data engineer, a software developer, and many others. In praxis, the modern computational biologist will be a “scientist of many hats”, taking on several of the duties listed above. But first and foremost, we will consider a computational biologist as a scientist whose ultimate goal is answering a biological question or addressing a need in the life sciences.

Computing requires following specific practices to enable shareable, reproducible and sustainable outputs that stand the test of time. Computing-heavy disciplines such as software development and data science have already adopted multiple practices addressing the need for project management, collaboration, visualization and strengthening of online communities. As a highly interdisciplinary and growing field, computational biology has yet to acquire a set of universal "best practices". Moreover, as most computational biologists come from diverse backgrounds, they are usually let on their own determining the best ways to conduct their research.

* Where is the community in terms of best practices / Cite literature in the topic

We premise that best practices in computational biology lie within a continuum that traverses three "levels": the individual’s internal practices, the collaborative practices of a team, and the practices that allow a broader scientific community to access, apply and engage over time with the tools and approaches developed. Each of these levels has a different set of needs and challenges. 

* Structure of the manuscript
