## Introduction

- Importance of computation in biological research and scope.
- Importance to reproducibility in computational biologt.
- Mentioning previous literature and some of their major takeaways and topics not fully covered in here (what kind of languages to learn, advanced text editors/IDEs, 
- The computational biology best-practices continuum: reproducibility at the personal level, sharing our research with others and over time.
- Addressing the audience: computational biologists researchers – data analysts, workflow designers, software developers, mathematical modelers, etc.
- Structure of this manuscript: mention Figure 1 and Figure 2.
  - **Figure 1:** Funnel structure for better computational biology.
  - **Figure 2:** Types of computational biology projects per level.

## Level 1: Individual Research

Goal: How should you manage your computational biology project?

Topics:
- Literate programming: R Markdown, Jupyter Notebooks
- Version control: Git / GitHub (commits)
- Software versioning and environment managers (Conda, python-env)
- Modularize, snippets
- Coding style: variable naming, linter, pep8, commenting
- Programming practices: paradigms (object-oriented, procedural), assertions, pair-programming

## Level 2: Collaboration

Goal: How to allow your collaborators to reproduce and interact with your research/software?

Topics:
- Sharing notebooks: R Markdowns and Jupyter Notebooks (Binder, Google CoLab)
- Sharing apps: Shiny apps, Dashboard.
- GitHub (branching, pull requests)
- Workflow automation: Snakemake (NextFlow, Make, Bash script)
- Sharing data and metadata

## Level 3: Community

Goal: How to develop and mantain a computational biology project with community feedback over time?

Topics:
- GitHub releases and semantic versioning
- Git Flow, GitHub Issues
- Continous integration and unit tests
- Dependencies per user: pip-tools
- Sharing software as Python packages, Conda/Bioconda or containers (Docker, Singularity)
- Include license (MIT) and DOIs
- Documentation: read the docs.

Note: Maybe add software development methodologies (Agile, Scrum, Sprints).

## All three levels in action

- Example of computational biology project 1: RNA-seq analysis (workflow)
- Example of computational biology project 2: Genome-scale metabolic model (community resource)
- Example of computational biology project 3: Software development (computational tool)
