## Final words

The importance of good practices in computational biology research have gain recognition among researchers given that new advice has been published in recent years and cloud-based Git repositories have become the default platform to share code and data analyses. This work adds to the existing literature, introducing a comprehensive list of best practices that can be applied to any computational biology project, regardless of the specific subfield and the experience of the researcher. We sought to comprehensively introduce tools covering the whole computational biology "journey", serving as a reference guide to be reached when needed. This approach complements other efforts that dive into specifics tools and that you can reach to get a better understanding of the tools you deem relevant to your research.

Although we have introduced many tools, we are aware that other good practices may have been left behind. Moreover, as time progresses, practices will expand and change as new tools emerge and the field matures. Both, the many tools and practices introduced and their changing nature, may seem very overwhelming, especially for someone new to the field. To overcome this, we encourage you to implement a few of practices first, starting from your personal research, and expand your repertoire over time. More importantly, keep a mindset of striving for reproducibility, regardless of the tools used.

In the midst of our work, under the many pressures of scientific research, we can forget about keeping good practices in place. In such scenario, the consequences will be not seeing immediately, but the long-term sustainability of our research will be compromised. Computational biology research heavily relies on building new knowledge from previous one. In that regard, the practices that we adopt in our personally are the building blocks of the overall reproducibility of the field that propel computational biology research forward.